Adding GEP-3539: Gateway API to Expose Pods on Cluster-Internal IP Address (ClusterIP Gateway) (#3608)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: geps/gep-3539/index.md

# GEP-3539: ClusterIP Gateway - Gateway API to Expose Pods on Cluster-Internal IP Address

* Issue: [#3539](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/issues/3539)

> * Status: Memorandum

Reviewer: This should currently be `Provisional`, as it's the first iteration and we are still deciding on the approach here.

The `Memorandum` status is for registering general agreement about things, not for features that will require actual code changes to the Gateway API specification (which this definitely will).

This also needs to be changed in the corresponding `metadata.yaml` file - the YAML file is actually the canonical place for the status, this is just to remind everyone. I'll suggest the same change there.

## TLDR

> Gateway API enables advanced traffic routing and can be used to expose a 
> logical set of pods on a single IP address within a cluster. It can be seen 
> as the next generation ClusterIP providing more flexibility and composability 
> than Service API. This comes at the expense of some additional configuration 
> and manageability burden.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gateway API enables advanced traffic routing and can be used to expose a 
logical set of pods on a single IP address within a cluster. With some changes,
it could be used as a next generation ClusterIP Service replacement,
providing more flexibility and composability than the existing Service API.

This comes at the expense of some additional configuration 
and manageability burden, but we believe that the additional value
gained is worth the cost.
```

This one is just a suggestion to make this read a little bit more clearly to me. Feel free to disregard if it doesn't match your intent here.

## Goals

* Define Gateway API usage to accomplish ClusterIP Service style behavior

> * Propose DNS layout and record format for ClusterIP Gateway

Reviewer 2: It doesn't seem like we have fleshed this out. Compared to https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/dns-pod-service/ we have just 1-2 sentences with a lot of ambiguity here.

Author: That is correct, we haven't. DNS bit has been identified as a good candidate to be split out into its own GEP

Reviewer 3: I've expressed elsewhere, but will say again - my ideal outcome is that users could 1-for-1 convert Services (maybe not "while running", but convert YAML) into this new form of Gateway and not change their clients at all.  Ideally this new thing gets the same name as the equivalent Service.

* Extend the use of Gateway API to provide NodePort and LoadBalancer Service 
  type of functionality

## Non-Goals

* Make significant changes to Gateway API
* Provide path for existing ClusterIP Services in a cluster to migrate to 
  Gateway API model

> ## API Changes
> 
> * EndpointSelector is recognized as a backend
> * DNS record format for ClusterIP Gateways 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## API Changes Summary

* EndpointSelector is recognized as a backend
* DNS record format for ClusterIP Gateways 
```

We haven't done this before in GEPs, but I really like this quick summary of the API changes as part of this GEP. @robscott @shaneutt @mlavacca should we consider adding this to the template?

## Introduction

Gateway API provides a generic and composable model for defining L4 and L7 
routing in Kubernetes. Very simply, it describes how to get traffic into pods. 
ClusterIP provides similar functionality of an ingress point for routing traffic 
into pods. As the Gateway API has evolved, there have been discussions around whether 
it can be a substitute for the increasingly complex and overloaded Service API. This 
document aims to describe what this could look like in practice, with a focus on 
ClusterIP and a brief commentary on how the concept design can be extended to 
accommodate LoadBalancer and NodePort Services.

## Overview

Gateway API can be thought of as decomposing Service API into multiple separable 
components that allow for definition of the ClusterIP address and listener configuration 
(Gateway resource), implementation specifics and common configuration (GatewayClass 
resource), and routing traffic to backends (Route resource).

> ### Limitations of Service API

Reviewer: I think we need to be realistic here and acknowledge the benefits of the Service API from a _user_'s POV - which I think we could summarize as that, for simple use cases, its very simple. It's only one object, as opposed to (at minimum) four in the simplest case here (GatewayClass, Gateway, Route, and EndpointSelector).

I completely agree that breaking Service apart for more advanced use cases is useful, but we should acknowledge the reason why it's stuck around for so long - the level of simplicity and flexibility it has allows folks to get started much more easily. Additionally, Service is a GA API that's not going anywhere, so we need to be _very_ clear that we're not talking about deprecating or replacing Service with this. As with Gateway API north/south and Ingress, the GA core resource is going to stick around, but this proposal is about giving us a better base to look at _adding_ features to rather than trying to fit them into the existing, overloaded Service construct.

Speaking from experience, putting a section outlining this into this document now will save a _lot_ of discussion later.

Reviewer 2: :100: agree, which is why, IMO, the best path forward here is making Service the higher level API that decomposes into these resources. Then you can chose to break the abstraction and manually configure the underlying resources (as you can do today by manually creating EndpointSlice!).

Otherwise we end up with a split universe indefinitely

Reviewer 3: Whether literally `core/v1.Service` gets decomposed into these or some new type which is "familiar but better" or some embedding into Gateway itself, I think I agree.  We need not fear layering.

Author: Commented [here](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3608#discussion_r2116603137). Will resolve for now and add to "Open Questions"

Besides what has been discussed in the past about Service API maintainability, evolvability, 
and complexity concerns, see: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Oslwx3hj2Eg, we ran into 
additional practical concerns that rendered Service API insufficient for the needs at hand.

Service IPs can only be assigned out of the ServiceCIDR range configured for the API server. 
While Kubernetes 1.31 added a Beta feature that allows for the Extension of Service IP Ranges, 
there have been use cases where multi-NIC pods (pods with multiple network interfaces) require 
the flexibility of specifying different ServiceCIDR ranges to be used for ClusterIP services 
corresponding to the multiple different networks. There are strict traffic splitting and network 
isolation requirements that demand non-overlapping ServiceCIDR ranges for per-network ClusterIP 

> service groups. Because of the way service definition and IP address allocation are tightly 

Reviewer 4: talked offline with @ptrivedi , what is unique across the cluster is the IPAddress, but we can perfectly introduce a `managed-by` label to ServiceCIDR objects so it can be used to identify multiple ranges to be handled by different controllers

coupled in API server, it is not possible to use the current Service API to achieve this model 
without resorting to inelegant and klugey implementations.

Gateway API also satisfies, in a user-friendly and uncomplicated manner, the need for advanced 
routing and load balancing capabilities in order to enable canary rollouts, weighted traffic 
distribution, isolation of access and configuration.

### Service Model to Gateway API Model

![image displaying service model to gateway api model mapping](images/service-model-gw-api-model.png "image displaying service model to gateway api model mapping")

### EndpointSelector as Backend

> A Route can forward traffic to the endpoints selected via selector rules defined in EndpointSelector. 

Reviewer 3: As always, Gateway proves something is a good idea, then core steals the spotlight.

While Service is the default resource kind of the referent in backendRef, EndpointSelector is 
suggested as an example of a custom resource that implementations could have to attach pods (or 
potentially other resource kinds) directly to a Route via backendRef. 

```yaml

> {% include 'standard/clusterip-gateway/tcproute-with-endpointselector.yaml' %}

Reviewer 5: these does not render. or does it suppose to be like this? see https://github.com/ptrivedi/gateway-api/blob/gep-clusterip-gateway/geps/gep-3539/index.md

Reviewer 5: Oh, wasnt aware of that page.

```

The EndpointSelector object is defined as follows. It allows the user to specify which endpoints 
should be targeted for the Route.

```yaml
{% include 'standard/clusterip-gateway/endpointselector.yaml' %}
```

To allow more granular control over traffic routing, there have been discussions around adding 
support for using Kubernetes resources besides Service (or external endpoints) directly as backendRefs. 
Gateway API allows for this flexibility, so having a generic EndpointSelector resource supported as a 
backendRef would be a good evolutionary step.

### User Journey

Infrastructure provider supplies a GatewayClass corresponding to the type of service-like behavior to 
be supported.

Below is the example of a GatewayClass for ClusterIP support:
```yaml
{% include 'standard/clusterip-gateway/clusterip-gatewayclass.yaml' %}
```

The user must then create a Gateway in order to configure and enable the behavior as per their intent:
```yaml
{% include 'standard/clusterip-gateway/clusterip-gateway.yaml' %}
```

> By default, IP address(es) from a pool specified by a CIDR block will be assigned unless a static IP is 

Author: > I think the default path should be to allocate from the same ServiceCIDR resource. If you need an IP from a different resource you would do something different. Either a different class or a different allocator or something.

Two problems (depending on whether we think of this having a path to being a regular core feature):
1) The current ServiceCIDR is coupled with core, managed by core controllers
2) The name 'ServiceCIDR'
Maybe there's more?

> By default, IP address(es) from a pool specified by a CIDR block will be assigned unless a static IP is 

Reviewer 4: commented in https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3608/files#r2053572715, ServiceCIDR acts as a definition of ranges and can be decoupled and server for other implementations to express IP ranges, specially since there is no cross object checks that may complicate it ... we just need to follow the existing convention of adding a label managed-by so the Services controllers handle their own resources

Finally the specific Route and EndpointSelector resources must be created in order to set up the backend 
pods for the configured ClusterIP.
```yaml
{% include 'standard/clusterip-gateway/customroute.yaml' %}
```

### Backends on Listeners

As seen above, Gateway API requires at least three CRs to be defined. This introduces some complexity. 
GEP-1713 proposes the addition of a ListenerSet resource to allow sets of listeners to attach to a Gateway. 
As a part of discussions around this topic, the idea of directly adding backendRefs to listeners has come 
up. Allowing backendRefs directly on the listeners eliminates the need to have Route objects for simple 
cases. More complex traffic splitting and advanced load balancing cases can still use Route attachments via 
allowedRoutes. 

### DNS

ClusterIP Gateways in the cluster need to have consistent DNS names assigned to allow ClusterIP lookup by 
name rather than IP address. DNS A and/or AAAA record creation needs to happen when Kubernetes publishes 
information about Gateways, in a manner similar to ClusterIP Service creation behavior. DNS nameservers 
in pods’ /etc/resolv.conf need to be programmed accordingly by kubelet.

```

> <name of gateway>.<gateway-namespace>.gw.cluster.local

Author: Agree on this. Another search path is not ideal. NodeLocal DNSCache may help. But the alternative of using "svc", as you pointed out, requires a solution for collision avoidance which could get messy. Another issue is using "svc" space which is used for 'Service' API -- more of a semantic issue

@aojea had some ideas here.

cc: @bowei

> <name of gateway>.<gateway-namespace>.gw.cluster.local

Reviewer 4: > Maybe, like IPAddress, we extract ServiceName to new resource, and whomever gets there first wins? 

agree, @thockin I do think we need to manage DNS and ClusterIP differently, both things are always different implementations,  kube-proxy and coredns per example, so having the same resource is good for the happy scenario, but once each of them require more specific features we end conflating everything in the same object with problems" like https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/105986#issuecomment-1352733564

```

This results in the following search option entries in Pods’ /etc/resolv.conf:
```
search <ns>.gw.cluster.local  gw.cluster.local  cluster.local
```

### Cross-namespace References

Gateway API allows for Routes in different namespaces to attach to the Gateway. 

When modeling ClusterIP service networking, the simplest recommendation might be to keep Gateway and Routes 
within the same namespace. While cross namespace routing would work and allow for evolved functionality, 

> it may make supporting certain cases tricky. One specific example for this case is the pod DNS resolution 

Reviewer 2: Given we are making a new DNS name, do we actually care to support this POD-IP DNS name?

Author: The pod-ip DNS name is for headless only: [https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/dns-pod-service/#:~:text=Any%20Pods%20exposed,domain.example](https://www.google.com/url?q=https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/dns-pod-service/%23:~:text%3DAny%2520Pods%2520exposed,domain.example&sa=D&source=docs&ust=1740581315499499&usg=AOvVaw2lP1Iu-nTiJ8zwUJcuqzY1). 
And that was before DNS specification. After DNS specification, the record is of the format 
pod-hostname.service-name.my-namespace.svc.cluster-domain.example

Headless, in case of Gateway API would likely be expressed using a separate GatewayClass, in order to avoid conflating ClusterIP and Headless and provide clean separation of concerns. So, you are right, does not necessarily need to be supported for ClusterIP Gateway.
Headless and externalName that are more DNS specific warrant more discussion

Reviewer 3: If we end up in a new DNS space, this whole proposal's value is diminished.  IMO.

support of the following format 

```
pod-ipv4-address.gateway-name.my-namespace.gw.cluster-domain.example
```

If Gateway and Routes (and hence the backing pods) are in different namespaces, there arises ambiguity in 
whether and how to support this pod DNS resolution format.

## LoadBalancer and NodePort Services

Extending the concept further to LoadBalancer and NodePort type services follows a similar pattern. The idea 
is to have a GatewayClass corresponding to each type of service networking behavior that needs to be modeled 
and supported.

> ![image displaying gatewayclasses to represent different service types](images/gatewayclasses-lb-np.png "image displaying gatewayclasses to represent different service types")

Reviewer 5: image missing or incorrect file name?

Author: Was a missing image. Fixed. Thanks for catching

Note that Gateway API allows flexibility and clear separation of concerns so that one would not need to 
configure cluster-ip and node-port when configuring a load-balancer.

> But for completeness, the case shown below demonstrates how load balancer functionality analogous to 

Reviewer 2: All of this proposal makes sense as a logic way to solve "If you had to implement Service using Gateway API primitives, how would you do it".

What doesn't make sense to me is the **why** and the **how** this becomes something practically useful from a proposal to a thing in the real world.

The diagram below shows 1 object becoming 8. Do we expect users to actually create these 8 objects?

Which projects are expected to, and which are commited to, supporting these? Kube-proxy? Coredns? Various 3p CNIs (Cilium, calico, etc)? Service meshes? All gateway implementations?

Author: > All of this proposal makes sense as a logic way to solve "If you had to implement Service using Gateway API primitives, how would you do it".
> 

Yes, that is how it started as a Memorandum GEP, but has evolved into 'this should be implemented'

> What doesn't make sense to me is the **why** and the **how** this becomes something practically useful from a proposal to a thing in the real world.
> 
Linking this question back to similar discussion thread here that has some good comments: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3608#discussion_r1967008362

> The diagram below shows 1 object becoming 8. Do we expect users to actually create these 8 objects?
> 
This diagram was mainly for completeness, in case someone wanted to use a common Route across different types of Gateway to mimic the exact LB Service behavior. Ideally though, with the Gateway API model, you won't need to mimic that behavior and configuring an LB Gateway won't require you to configure ClusterIP and NodePort Gateways as well.
Not denying that you would still be going from 1 to 4 objects, but that's an ongoing discussion that doesn't get old.

> Which projects are expected to, and which are commited to, supporting these? Kube-proxy? Coredns? Various 3p CNIs (Cilium, calico, etc)? Service meshes? All gateway implementations?

Don't have an answer to that yet.

LoadBalancer Service API can be achieved using Gateway API.

![image displaying LB Service API analogous GW API objects](images/LB-NP-Clusterip.png "image displaying LB Service API analogous GW API objects")

## Additional Service API Features

Services natively provide additional features as listed below (not an exhaustive list). Gateway API can be 
extended to provide some of these features natively, while others may be left up to the specifics of 
implementations. 

| Feature | ServiceAPI options | Gateway API possibilities |
|---|---|---|

> | sessionAffinity | ClientIP <br /> NoAffinity | Route level

Reviewer: Not currently, no.

> | sessionAffinity | ClientIP <br /> NoAffinity | Route level

Reviewer 6: it would be great to have options for more than `ClientIP` as in the services case. We've had people asking about 2-tuple, 3-tuple, 5-tuple affinities

> | allocateLoadBalancerNodePorts | True <br /> False | Not supported for ClusterIP Gateway <br /> Supported for LoadBalancer Gateway |

Reviewer 5: we could say N/A for this approach, since you can create LB type without NodePort - sort of simplification.

Author: That might be clearer until further discussion on each of these.

| externalIPs | List of externalIPs for service | Not supported? |

> | externalTrafficPolicy | Local <br /> Cluster | Supported for LB Gateways only, Route level |

Reviewer 3: These are all interesting challenges which maybe need something more than a plain TCP Route?

Author: A more generic L4Route that combines TCP/UDPRoutes?

service groups. Because of the way service definition and IP address allocation are tightly 
coupled in API server, it is not possible to use the current Service API to achieve this model 
without resorting to inelegant and klugey implementations.

Gateway API also satisfies, in a user-friendly and uncomplicated manner, the need for advanced 
routing and load balancing capabilities in order to enable canary rollouts, weighted traffic 
distribution, isolation of access and configuration.

### Service Model to Gateway API Model

![image displaying service model to gateway api model mapping](images/service-model-gw-api-model.png "image displaying service model to gateway api model mapping")

### EndpointSelector as Backend

A Route can forward traffic to the endpoints selected via selector rules defined in EndpointSelector. 
While Service is the default resource kind of the referent in backendRef, EndpointSelector is 
suggested as an example of a custom resource that implementations could have to attach pods (or 
potentially other resource kinds) directly to a Route via backendRef. 

```yaml
{% include 'standard/clusterip-gateway/tcproute-with-endpointselector.yaml' %}
```

> The EndpointSelector object is defined as follows. It allows the user to specify which endpoints 

Reviewer 7: Would it make sense to have a config field so we can have implementation specific parameters?
For example, if I create a Layer 3/4 load balancer type of gateway, I would like to express how the traffic will be distributed (what algorithm is being used), the maximum number of endpoints and from where IP addresses should be selected (ResourceClaim (Multi-Network), Annotations (Multus)...).

Reviewer 7: > Yes, I think something like config would be needed.

The `Gateway` has a similar field in .spec.infrastructure.parametersRef pointing to another object holding the configuration (e.g. configmap).
Otherwise, it is also possible to use `runtime.RawExtension` to embed arbitrary parameters in the `EndpointSelector`.
DRA uses it for example: https://github.com/kubernetes/api/blob/release-1.33/resource/v1beta2/types.go#L1032

> How the traffic will be distributed seems to be more of a Route level config than EndpointSelector level config. e.g. BackendRefs already have a weight field today

Not sure. To me, this is a combination of both Route and Backend (Service, EndpointSelector...). The Route steers traffic to backends via some characteristics (L7 (HTTP...), L3/L4 (IPs, Ports, protocols)) and the backend (Service, EndpointSelector...) defines how to distribute it (Load-Balance it over a set of IPs).

> publishNotReadyAddresses could be one more thing that could go here

Yes, to me `publishNotReadyAddresses` would also make sense there in the `EndpointSelector`.

it may make supporting certain cases tricky. One specific example for this case is the pod DNS resolution 
support of the following format 

```
pod-ipv4-address.gateway-name.my-namespace.gw.cluster-domain.example
```

If Gateway and Routes (and hence the backing pods) are in different namespaces, there arises ambiguity in 
whether and how to support this pod DNS resolution format.

## LoadBalancer and NodePort Services

Extending the concept further to LoadBalancer and NodePort type services follows a similar pattern. The idea 
is to have a GatewayClass corresponding to each type of service networking behavior that needs to be modeled 
and supported.

![image displaying gatewayclasses to represent different service types](images/gatewayclasses-lb-np.png "image displaying gatewayclasses to represent different service types")

Note that Gateway API allows flexibility and clear separation of concerns so that one would not need to 
configure cluster-ip and node-port when configuring a load-balancer.

But for completeness, the case shown below demonstrates how load balancer functionality analogous to 

> LoadBalancer Service API can be achieved using Gateway API.

Reviewer 6: the example from the image uses load-balancer as the class. The cloud providers usually have a few variants of LBs and preferably these would have their own classes

but these would be somewhat unique since the cloud provider controller would act on it but also kubeproxy, cilium and others would need to do some setup on their side. Maybe we could set something on the GatewayClass that would indicate it's a L4 LB class so that the node networking part has to treat it as a LB?

![image displaying LB Service API analogous GW API objects](images/LB-NP-Clusterip.png "image displaying LB Service API analogous GW API objects")

## Additional Service API Features

Services natively provide additional features as listed below (not an exhaustive list). Gateway API can be 
extended to provide some of these features natively, while others may be left up to the specifics of 
implementations. 

| Feature | ServiceAPI options | Gateway API possibilities |
|---|---|---|
| sessionAffinity | ClientIP <br /> NoAffinity | Route level
| allocateLoadBalancerNodePorts | True <br /> False | Not supported for ClusterIP Gateway <br /> Supported for LoadBalancer Gateway |
| externalIPs | List of externalIPs for service | Not supported? |
| externalTrafficPolicy | Local <br /> Cluster | Supported for LB Gateways only, Route level |
| internalTrafficPolicy | Local <br /> Cluster | Supported for ClusterIP Gateways only, Route level |

> | ipFamily | IPv4 <br /> IPv6 | Route level |

Reviewer 7: If the IPs are specified only in the Gateway and not in the Routes, why would the ipFamily be at the Route Level?
Or should there be a Layer 3 and 4 Route that contains the Ports, Protocol and IPs (+ipFamily)?

Author: > If the IPs are specified only in the Gateway and not in the Routes, why would the ipFamily be at the Route Level? Or should there be a Layer 3 and 4 Route that contains the Ports, Protocol and IPs (+ipFamily)?

I think you are right, ipFamily makes sense at the Gateway level since IPs and even ports and protocols are under Listeners in Gateway

Author: > If the IPs are specified only in the Gateway and not in the Routes, why would the ipFamily be at the Route Level? Or should there be a Layer 3 and 4 Route that contains the Ports, Protocol and IPs (+ipFamily)?

I also just realized why I had some of these at the Route level. I started off with wanting to minimize changes to the API and Route is extensible while Gateway is not. Things are evolving a bit differently now though.

Author: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api/pull/3608#:~:text=I%20did%20not,may%20be%20needed.

![image displaying LB Service API analogous GW API objects](images/LB-NP-Clusterip.png "image displaying LB Service API analogous GW API objects")

## Additional Service API Features

Services natively provide additional features as listed below (not an exhaustive list). Gateway API can be 
extended to provide some of these features natively, while others may be left up to the specifics of 
implementations. 

| Feature | ServiceAPI options | Gateway API possibilities |
|---|---|---|
| sessionAffinity | ClientIP <br /> NoAffinity | Route level
| allocateLoadBalancerNodePorts | True <br /> False | Not supported? (No need for LB Gateway type to also create NodePort) |
| externalIPs | List of externalIPs for service | Not supported? |
| externalTrafficPolicy | Local <br /> Cluster | Supported for LB Gateways only, Route level |
| internalTrafficPolicy | Local <br /> Cluster | Supported for ClusterIP Gateways only, Route level |
| ipFamily | IPv4 <br /> IPv6 | Route level |
| publishNotReadyAddresses | True <br /> False | Route or EndpointSelector level |
| ClusterIP (headless service) | IPAddress <br /> None | GatewayClass definition for Headless Service type |

> | externalName | External name reference <br /> (e.g. DNS CNAME) | GatewayClass definition for ExternalName Service type |

Reviewer 8: - `sessionAffinity` - As noted elsewhere, this not implemented compatibly by all service proxies. It's also not implemented by many LoadBalancers because historically we have mostly not done any e2e testing for non-GCE LoadBalancers.
- `externalIPs` - bad alternative implementation of LoadBalancers. Needed for "exactly equivalent to Service" Gateways but not wanted for "similar to Service" Gateways.
- `externalTrafficPolicy: Local` - overly-opinionated combined implementation of two separate features (preserve source IP / route traffic more efficiently). We should do this better for the "similar to Service" case.
- `publishNotReadyAddresses` - is this just an early attempt to solve the problem that was later solved better by ProxyTerminatingEndpoints?

Not mentioned here:
- `trafficDistribution` - I'm not sure what Gateway already has for topology, but this is definitely something that should be exposed generically.
